Arduino: The Documentary

Arduino started as a project that we did at the Interaction Design Institute Ivrea, back in 2005.

But it has some roots in previous projects that we worked on

because we wanted to make a tool for our students that was more modern than what was available

on the market at the moment especially because the tool that everybody was using

this called the BASIC Stamp, in Italy was costing at the time about 76 Euros, that's like $100,

 so it was very expensive for the students, they wouldn't do any ... too much work,

 because they didn't want to spend money on buying many boards that expensive.

 So what happened we started to look at possible alternatives

and also we were, working on Processing, the Processing language,

because Casey Reas, one of the founders, was one of the teachers in Ivrea, 

so we thought "Why don't we try to figure out how to make Processing for the hardware?"

So we worked with a students who did a thesis, on the topic, and that produced the Wiring platform.

Hernando Barragán, a Colombian student, worked on it. And then after Hernando made Wiring, we started

to figure out how could we make the whole, platform even simpler, even cheaper, even easier to use.

And then we started to essentially reimplement the whole thing as an open source project.

We wanted it to be open source so that everybody could come and help and contribute.

Then we had another issue, that there were a lot of discussions about the school closing,

 so we decided "ok, let's try to make this platform and open it up as much as possible."

David Cuartielles (Arduino Team)

Then we stopped talking about what we would like to have


and started talking about how to do it.

And when we started talking about how to do it,


Massimo had been experimenting with some technology,
I had been experimenting with a different technology.


we had a talk to decide what was best and 


I decided to try this technology Massimo had,


because of its better compatibility
with different operating systems.


I checked the hardware, found a couple of bug, we fixed that,
and well, we started making boards ...


I mean, the process from starting to seriously
work on it to having a board was a mere two-days.


All the rest was software.


While I was kind of in the middle of this I met with
David Cuartielles, 


who started to sort of help me 
in the project, then became a major contributor


and then together we kind of made the first
Arduino hardware; 


then we had David Mellis
joining as a student to write the software,


then Tom came in as an advisor, 
and finally then Gianluca came in 


as the person who was able to manufacture
the board itself, 


that's how the team 
kind of formed, by adding people by their skills.


(David Mellis, Arduino Team)


We've been using Wiring boards and wanted
to port a bunch of programs 


to a cheaper microprocessor, basically, to install in some
installations,

and I helped write like
a little compatibility layer, 


so that all 
the old programs could run in the new
processor ...

And then just being in Ivrea and not wanting
to spend too much time on my actual thesis


I spent more and more time like working
with Massimo and the other guys developing
Arduino.

(Tom Igoe, Arduino Team)

I knew that there was this development of 
hardware equivalent to Processing. 

And I went over to Ivrea in June of 2005 to do a
workshop with them on another subject

and they showed me the Arduino board
at that point. And I looked at it and I said:

"You know, this is great, and it definitely works for your school, 

works for my school too, but I think it
could be a larger thing, 


and I think more people would want to use this." 

And Massimo said: "Well, that's good feedback, thanks."

And then I went back to the States, and a couple of weeks later they wrote me and said:

"You know, we want to go further with this,
and we want to try and get it to the larger world.

"Do you want to join us as a part of the team?"
And I said "Yeah". 

And it was just ... for me it was a case that this is a tool I could see using myself,

and therefore I could believe in actually helping to get it out to a wider world.

(Gianluca Martino)

After the first prototyping there was the need,

or the desire, to start manufacturing something in a more professional way, 

and in a more commercial way, because all the first sample was mounted,

was done just to make them ... to let them work. After Massimo and David decided and understood

the prototype was working they needed to make a bigger batch. 

So we decided to work on 200 units and we made ... 

I made a little redesign, a little design for manufacturing in order to produce them. 

It was a test. They agreed with their school, the Interaction Design Institute, and the K3 of Malmö,

to buy 50 each. That was a good starting point:
that means we will not lose all the money

but at least half was coming back. The selling
price was exactly what we paid for 

I think we earned 1 euro for each board, that is nothing
considering all the effort we put inside. 

But after some advertisement, after some speaking
with friends, this movement started to move.

And so we received the first call, our first customer, asking for one board. It was a friend of Massimo's and David's, 

but this was the beggining of something.

(Nathan Seidle, sparkfun.com)


A few months after meeting he said "Hey Nate, Spark Fun, you guys should carry this thing called Arduino." 

and I looked at it and at that time it was the through hole version, the RS-232 version, 

and I said "This looks very interesting" but I didn't really understand it.

And ... I hadn't wrapped my head around it. And so I said: "You know, Tom, I don't think it's for us,

we don't really do kits, we are not sure how people are going to react to this, and so I decided against it. 


It was a few months later, six, seven months later, that Arduino came out with the full USB version, 

fully assembled and tested and ready to go, and Tom again came to us

and said "Hey, SparkFun, you should really carry this." And I said: "OK, well, I'm not really sure, 

you know, we'll bring in 20 and see how they sell." And that was the first 20 out of about 40,000 at this point.

(Marcos García, Medialab Prado)

The first time we heard about Arduino was when David Cuartielles came to an activity

called "Thursdays at Medialab", which actually was the first session of that still on-going activity.

(Gustavo Valera, Laboral)

So he keeps talking about stuff and at the end, after 90 minutes of listening to all of David's tales, 

he says he's involved in this project, but it was a really small thing, you know? 

And I thought "At last! Come on, David, why wasn't this the first thing you said?"

I want to talk to you about Arduino. Arduino is the last project, I finished it last week. 

I talk to Ivrea's technical director and told him: "Wouldn't it be great to do something we can offer for free?"

- For free?
- Yeah

And after that, well, we worked with Gustavo, and also kept in touch with David, 

and we organized an Arduino workshop in Octover 2005, which was one of the first Arduino workshops, 

if not the first one ever.

On the last day David proposed creating some small prototypes. 

He called it "Bring your old junk and let's do something with it."

That led to some quite interesting projects, and these people kept on doing small electronic instruments, small robots ...

(Phil Torrone, AdaFruit.com)


Let's see, at the time I was a senior editor at MAKE. MAKE was only a couple of years old, 

and I had heard about this Arduino project, and I saw it online and I said: 

"Well, a lot of people are starting to talk about his, and I should check it out."

And I got one of the boards and said "Whoa, this is fantastic, begginers are gonna love this. 

It runs on Mac, it runs on PC, it runs on Linux ... this is exactly what everyone wants."

At the time a lot of people were using BASIC Stamps, they were using all sorts of microcontrollers, 

and I come from using design tools like Flash and Processing, and I'm like

"Oh, this is perfect, it's exactly what I think everyone is going to want".

And this was the beggining of when MAKE was starting to have a store, and so it took a little while, 

and you know, it's very hard to do international money transfers.

Basically we started selling Arduinos in MAKE right away, and then late on, when I started working with Limor, 

who's part of Adafruit, she's a founder, we also said right away: 

"This is a fantastic tool for getting people doing the things that they want to do with electronics."

Not necessarily learning everything first, but getting the application done, like

I want something ... I want my dress to blink. Very hard to do if you just want to learn electronics

with an Arduino you get that done in a few minutes.